---
title: Rhenohercynian Tectonic Framework

# View.
#   1 = List
#   2 = Compact
#   3 = Card
#   4 = Citation
view: 3

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""

summary: Relationships with the trans-European Rhenohercynian Zone
weight: 10
---

The Rhenohercynian Tectonic Framework
-------------------------------------

SW England forms part of the extensional Rhenohercynian passive margin
and is located between the Avalonian, Armorican and Normannian
microplates. The position of the SW England segment of the
Rhenohercynian Zone, its relationship to Rheic Ocean closure and the
absence of major deformation caused by the Acadian event is unclear
(Holder and Leveridge, 1986; Shail and Leveridge, 2009; Woodcock et al.,
2007).

Understanding the pre-Devonian tectonic framework of SW England is
hindered by a lack of data to determine the basement of the Devonian
passive margin basins (Shail and Leveridge, 2009). Further complications
arise due to the overprint of orogenic events from the mid-Silurian
onwards relating to Caledonian, Acadian and eventual Variscan collision
(Woodcock et al., 2007). Matthews (1984) argued that the Caledonian and
Variscan orogenic events are not separate entities but are a single
protracted event, going as far as to argue that a Variscan "front" is
undefinable. Whilst a Variscan front can be defined structurally through
South Wales (Leveridge and Hartley, 2006), therefore indicating a
separate orogenic event, Le Gall (1991) suggested that Caledonian
structures influenced the formation of E-W trending extensional Devonian
basins and are manifest as NW-SE (presumably reactivated) structures
during the Variscan Orogeny.

Evidence for a protracted Caledonian-Acadian-Variscan event is lacking
in SW England where seafloor spreading in the Lizard Complex (397 $\pm$
2 Ma; Clark et al., 1998) was coincident with peak Acadian deformation
in the Early Devonian (Woodcock et al., 2007). A solution is proposed by
Woodcock et al. (2007) that a terrane, termed Prettania (most likely NW
Iberia), lay where SW England is now positioned and that the
Rhenohercynian Zone lay some 400 km to the southeast. Carboniferous
dextral movement along the Bristol Channel-Bray Fault Zone then
translated SW England to its current position
(Figure 1), but a mechanism for
synchronous Acadian deformation and Rhenohercynian extension is yet to
be satisfactorily explained (Holder and Leveridge, 1986; Leveridge and
Shail, 2011; Woodcock et al., 2007).

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/PrettaniaModels.png" alt="Prettania">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 1</i> From Woodcock, Soper, and Strachan (2007) describing the possible
models for the removal of Prettania and translation of Rhenohercynian
rocks (SW England) to be juxtaposed against the Avalonian rocks of Wales
and central England. A) demonstrates the strike-slip movements along
what is likely the Bristol Channel-Bray Fault Zone. B) shows the
movement of the Iberian peninsula towards the south through block
rotation of two major strike-slip faults.
 </figcaption>
</figure>

The interplay of Avalonia, Armorica, the Normannian microplate (Holder
and Leveridge, 1986) and the postulated Prettania terrane (Woodcock et
al., 2007) formed a complex pre-Devonian framework upon which the
Rhenohercynian Zone formed. The Rhenohercynian may be a microplate in
its own right within a large Rheic Ocean which closed in the Silurian
with the north-dipping suture buried under the Culm Basin of central
Devon (Dijkstra and Hatch, 2018).

Shail and Leveridge (2009) attempt to reconcile the problems discussed
above through a series of models illustrated in
Figure 2. The
Rhenohercynian passive margin is postulated to be not of Rheic origin
but a marginal basin prior to, or a successor basin following, Rheic
closure. The latter is supported by Dijkstra and Hatch (2018) and from
re-interpretation of seismic reflection data by Alexander et al. (2019)
who identify two potential south-dipping suture zones along the southern
margin. The first, and more northerly, is considered to be a Silurian
suture relating to closure of a segment of the Rheic Ocean. The
inception of a successor basin resulted in the Rhenohercynian passive
margin and small ocean opening prior to a second suture during the Late
Devonian.

These proposed model do not account for transtension during opening of
the passive margin or formation of oceanic crust. It is possible that
transtension was partitioned, resulting in a proximal, transtensional
oceanic Gramscatho Basin juxtaposed against the passive margin basins to
the north. Seismic and magnetic data infer Carboniferous southward
subduction along the Bray segment of the Rhenohercynian suture which may
add credence to these models (Averbuch and Piromallo, 2012).

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/ShailModels.png" alt="ShailModels">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 2</i> Cartoon of possible models of Rhenohercynian Zone (RHZ, in yellow)
tectonic development with respect to Rheic Ocean closure Eastern
Avalonia (EA), the Normannian terrane (NT, in pink), Leon Sea (LS) and
Northern Armorica (NA, in green). Reproduced from Shail and Leveridge
(2009).
 </figcaption>
</figure>

### References

Alexander, Andrew C, Robin K Shail, and Brian E Leveridge. 2019. "Late
Paleozoic extensional reactivation of the Rheic--Rhenohercynian suture
zone in SW England, the English Channel and Western Approaches."
*Geological Society, London, Special Publications* 470 (January):
SP470.19. <https://doi.org/10.1144/SP470.19>.

Averbuch, O, and C Piromallo. 2012. "Is there a remnant Variscan
subducted slab in the mantle beneath the Paris basin? Implications for
the late Variscan lithospheric delamination process and the Paris basin
formation." *Tectonophysics* 558-559 (August). Elsevier B.V.: 70--83.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2012.06.032>.

Clark, A H, D J Scott, H A Sandeman, A V Bromley, and E Farrar. 1998.
"Siegenian generation of the Lizard ophiolite: U-Pb zircon age data for
plagiogranite, Porthkerris, Cornwall." *Journal of the Geological
Society, London* 155: 595--98.

Dijkstra, Arjan H., and Callum Hatch. 2018. "Mapping a hidden terrane
boundary in the mantle lithosphere with lamprophyres." *Nature
Communications* 9 (1). Springer US.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06253-7>.

Holder, M T, and B E Leveridge. 1986. "Correlation of the Rhenohercynian
Variscides." *Journal of the Geological Society, London* 143 (1):
141--47. <https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.143.1.0141>.

Le Gall, B. 1991. "Crustal evolutionary model for the Variscides of
Ireland and Wales from SWAT seismic data." *Journal of the Geological
Society, London* 148: 759--74.

Leveridge, B E, and A J Hartley. 2006. "The Varisan Orogeny: the
development and deformation of Devonian/Carboniferous basins in SW
England and South Wales." In *The Geology of England and Wales*, edited
by P J Brenchley and P F Rawson, 2nd ed., 225--56. The Geological
Society, London.

Leveridge, B E, and R K Shail. 2011. "The marine Devonian stratigraphy
of Great Britain." *Proceedings of the Geologists' Association* 122 (4).
The Geologists' Association.: 540--67.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pgeola.2011.03.003>.

Matthews, S C. 1984. "Northern margins of the Variscides in the North
Atlantic region: comments on the tectonic context of the problem."
*Geological Society, London, Special Publications* 14: 71--85.

Shail, R K, and B E Leveridge. 2009. "The Rhenohercynian passive margin
of SW England: Development, inversion and extensional reactivation."
*Comptes Rendus Geoscience* 341: 140--55.

Woodcock, N H, N J Soper, and R A Strachan. 2007. "A Rheic cause for the
Acadian deformation in Europe." *Journal of the Geological Society,
London* 164: 1023--36.


