---
title: Devonian-Carboniferous Sedimentary Basins

# View.
#   1 = List
#   2 = Compact
#   3 = Card
#   4 = Citation
view: 3

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""

summary: Sedimentation on the passive margin
weight: 20
---

The Cornubian passive margin succession accumulated in six E-W trending
basins (Figure 1) which
were actively extending from the Lochkovian-Pragian to the Viséan
(Leveridge and Hartley, 2006; Leveridge et al., 2002; Merriman et al.,
2000). Variscan shortening of the Rhenohercynian passive margin has been
estimated to be approximately 50% or not less than 150 km (Franke, 2000;
Shackleton et al., 1982), therefore, it can be inferred the original
width of the passive margin was some 300 km. The Devono-Carboniferous
sedimentary rocks were deposited in the Gramscatho, Looe, South Devon,
Tavy, Culm and North Devon basins. The oldest of these is the Looe Basin
with periodic basin formation towards the north. The North Devon Basin
represents the most continental sedimentary succession and displays
cyclic sedimentation relating to the formation of the South Devon, Tavy
and Culm basins that lie between it and the Looe Basin. The Gramscatho
Basin forms the southern edge of the continental passive margin and
represents the transition into an oceanic setting (Leveridge and
Hartley, 2006; Leveridge et al., 2002). Between the passive margin
basins, structurally controlled topographic highs are observed, although
much of the exposures are occluded by later basin inversion.

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/SWEgeology.png" alt="SWEgeology">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 1</i> Figure modified from Shail and Leveridge (2009) and originally based on
Leveridge and Hartley (2006) showing the arrangement of
Devonian-Carboniferous basins in SW England, the Sticklepath Lustleight
Fault Zone (SLFZ), Lizard Complex (LC), Start Complex (SC),
Start-Perranporth Zone (SPZ), St Mellion Outlier (SM) and Permian
Granites: LEG - Land's End Granite; CG - Carnmenellis Granite; SAG - St
Austell Granite; BMG - Bodmin Granite; DG - Dartmoor Granite.
 </figcaption>
</figure>


Figure modified from Shail and Leveridge (2009) and originally based on
Leveridge and Hartley (2006) showing the arrangement of
Devonian-Carboniferous basins in SW England, the Sticklepath Lustleight
Fault Zone (SLFZ), Lizard Complex (LC), Start Complex (SC),
Start-Perranporth Zone (SPZ), St Mellion Outlier (SM) and Permian
Granites: LEG - Land's End Granite; CG - Carnmenellis Granite; SAG - St
Austell Granite; BMG - Bodmin Granite; DG - Dartmoor Granite.

The Looe Basin hosts the earliest (?Lochkovian) rocks of the Devonian
passive margin succession (Hollick et al., 2014; Leveridge and Hartley,
2006; Leveridge et al., 2002). These include the sedimentary successions
of the Dartmouth, Meadfoot and Tamar groups. The Looe Basin is separated
from the South Devon Basin to the north by the Plymouth High (Leveridge
et al., 2002) which is partially occluded and is likely to correlate
with the Brixham High described by Leveridge et al. (2003).

The South Devon Basin was first defined in its modern form by Leveridge
et al. (2002) and was discussed in a regional context by Leveridge and
Hartley (2006). The definition extended the existing South Devon Basin
westwards into north Cornwall, and the former "Trevone Basin" became
obsolete. The basin comprises two sub-basins (north and south) divided
by the mid-basin Torquay High (Leveridge and Hartley, 2006; Leveridge et
al., 2003). Despite recent revisions, a complicated lexicon still
exists. Formation divisions within the Tamar Group are more dependent on
geographic location rather than lithostratigraphic character. Many of
the formations in north Cornwall are assimilated from the previous
"Trevone Basin" nomenclature or unrevised geological maps simply divide
units into Middle and Upper Devonian (e.g. Ivybridge, Sheet 349). A
review by Leveridge (2011) attempts to reconcile the inconsistencies
between formation names within the basin.

The Landulph High forms a horst separating the South Devon and Tavy
basins. The Tavy Basin includes the northwest "Trevone Basin"
stratigraphy and is therefore similarly complicated in its nomenclature
as the South Devon Basin Leveridge et al. (2002; Leveridge, 2011;
Leveridge and Hartley, 2006). The basin formed in the Givetian and has
high concentrations of chlorite and pyrite, indicating reducing
conditions, which contrast with the oxidising environment (red-purple
rocks) of the South Devon Basin (Leveridge and Hartley, 2006). It is
inferred by Leveridge and Hartley (2006) that the change in
sedimentation is likely due to the presence of the Landulph High which
isolated the Tavy Basin from the South Devon Basin.

The northern margin of the Tavy Basin is marked by the occluded Laneast
High. The horst block formed in the Famennian following the inception of
the extensional Culm Basin; a graben basin that existed into the Viséan
(Leveridge and Hartley, 2006). The Culm Basin was extensional prior to
Variscan orogenesis which caused inversion and transformation into a
foreland basin (Hartley and Warr, 1990). The extensional Culm Basin
succession has three sub-basins; the Central Devon Sub-basin forms the
main graben with two half-grabens, the Bideford Sub-basin and Launceston
Sub-basin to the north and south, respectively (Leveridge and Hartley,
2006; Waters and Davies, 2006; Waters et al., 2009). Furthermore,
Mississippian rocks crop out in the St Mellion Outlier, an expelled
segment of the Culm Basin (Leveridge et al., 2002). The Mississippian
succession has been reviewed by Waters et al. (2009) and has been
correlated across the sub-basins as part of the Teign Valley Group.

The North Devon Basin forms the most northerly basin of the
Devonian-Carboniferous passive margin and includes rocks of
Emsian-Serpukhovian age (Leveridge and Hartley, 2006; Waters et al.,
2009; Whittaker and Leveridge, 2011). The Devonian to Tournaisian
succession is defined as the Exmoor Group and the succeeding
Tournaisian-Serpukhovian succession of the Teign Valley Group (Waters et
al., 2009). The Exmoor Group represents a cyclic
terrestrial-lacustrine-nearshore-shallow marine environment associated
with the largely marine passive margin succession to the south
(Leveridge and Hartley, 2006; Waters et al., 2009; Whittaker and
Leveridge, 2011). Cycles represent an initial shallow marine
transgression immediately after basin inception with a subsequent
coarsening-up of the sediment representing shallowing of the basin to
terrestrial-lacustrine environments (Leveridge and Hartley, 2006;
Whittaker and Leveridge, 2011).

### References

Franke, W., 2000. The mid-European segment of the Variscides:
tectonostratigraphic units, terrane boundaries and plate tectonic
evolution. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 179, 35--61.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/GSL.SP.2000.179.01.05>

Hartley, A.J., Warr, L.N., 1990. Upper Carboniferous foreland basin
evolution in SW Britain. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 7, 212--216.

Hollick, L.M., Scrivener, R.C., Burt, C.E., 2014. Geology of the Newquay
district - a brief explanation of the geological map. Sheet Explanation
of the British Geological Survey. 1:50 000 Sheet 346 Newquay (England;
Wales).

Leveridge, B.E., 2011. The Looe, South Devon and Tavy basins: the
Devonian rifted passive margin successions. Proceedings of the
Geologists' Association 122, 616--717.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pgeola.2011.03.005>

Leveridge, B.E., Hartley, A.J., 2006. The Varisan Orogeny: the
development and deformation of Devonian/Carboniferous basins in SW
England and South Wales, in: Brenchley, P.J., Rawson, P.F. (Eds.), The
Geology of England and Wales. The Geological Society, London, pp.
225--256.

Leveridge, B.E., Holder, M.T., Goode, A.J.J., Scrivener, R.C., Jones,
N.S., Merriman, R.J., 2002. Geology of the Plymouth and south-east
Cornwall area. Memoir of the British Geological Survey, Sheet 348.
England; Wales.

Leveridge, B.E., Scrivener, R.C., Goode, A.J.J., Merriman, R.J., 2003.
The geology of the Torquay district. Memoir of the British Geological
Survey, Sheet 350. England; Wales.

Merriman, R.J., Evans, J.A., Leveridge, B.E., 2000. Devonian and
Carboniferous volcanic rocks associated with the passive margin
sequences of SW England; some geochemical perspectives. Geoscience in
South-West England 10, 77--85.

Shackleton, R.M., Ries, A.C., Coward, M.P., 1982. An interpretation of
the Variscan structures in SW England. Journal of the Geological
Society, London 139, 533--541.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.139.4.0533>

Shail, R.K., Leveridge, B.E., 2009. The Rhenohercynian passive margin of
SW England: Development, inversion and extensional reactivation. Comptes
Rendus Geoscience 341, 140--155.

Waters, C.N., Davies, S.J., 2006. Carboniferous: extensional basins,
advancing deltas and coal swamps, in: Brenchley, P.J., Rawson, P.F.
(Eds.), The Geology of England and Wales. The Geological Society,
London, pp. 173--223.

Waters, C.N., Waters, R.A., Barclay, W.J., Davies, J.R., 2009. A
lithostratigraphical framework for the Carboniferous successions of
southern Great Britain (onshore). British Geological Survey Research
Report, RR/09/01.

Whittaker, A., Leveridge, B.E., 2011. The North Devon Basin: a Devonian
passive margin shelf succession. Proceedings of the Geologists'
Association 122, 718--744.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pgeola.2011.03.006>

