---
title: Variscan Tectonics

# View.
#   1 = List
#   2 = Compact
#   3 = Card
#   4 = Citation
view: 3

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""

summary: Devonian-Carboniferous collision
weight: 30
---
The Variscan Orogeny is first recorded in syn-collisional sedimentation
along the southern margin of the Gramscatho Basin dated to the Middle
Devonian (Leveridge, 2008; Leveridge and Hartley, 2006) and the Lizard
Complex is inferred by Leveridge et al. (1990) to have been tectonically
emplaced in the Late Eifelian-Early Givetian. However, basin extension
was still on-going to the north with several of the passive margin
basins yet to form (Whittaker and Leveridge, 2011). Complete closure of
the Gramscatho basin in the late Famennian to Early Carboniferous,
represents the commencement of continental collision and basin inversion
(Leveridge and Hartley, 2006; Leveridge et al., 1984, 1990; Wilkinson
and Knight, 1989). Basin inversion is diachronous across the passive
margin and allows for continued extension in the Mississippian Culm
Basin (Isaac et al., 1982; Leveridge et al., 1984; Rattey and Sanderson,
1984).

The mode of deformation, either thin-skinned or thick-skinned, has been
a matter of some debate since the early 1980s (e.g. Shackleton et al.,
1982; Coward and McClay, 1983; Isaac et al., 1982; Sanderson, 1984;
Shackleton, 1984). Both theories made the assumption that granite
magmatism was Variscan; this was later disproven through a geochronology
study by Darbyshire and Shepherd (1985). Thick-skinned deformation was
preferred due to field evidence for inversion structures (Hartley and
Warr, 1990; Leveridge et al., 2002; Selwood, 1990), however, the
identification of a décollement surface in the middle crust from seismic
reflection studies (Brooks et al., 1984) hindered its adoption. The
solution, inferred by Shail and Leveridge (2009), is that
"*thick-skinned inversion ... \[occurs\] above a regional, décollement
surface at the base of the middle crust*".

### Variscan Convergence

Variscan deformation is variable across the region, however, it is best
characterised by structures in south Cornwall and south Devon. Notable
areas that differ to those described here include the Pennsylvanian Culm
Basin (Lloyd and Chinnery, 2002) and the margins of the Land's End
Granite (Hughes, 2018; Hughes et al., 2009).\
Thrust tectonics led to the development of two deformation episodes, D1
and D2, first described by Smith (1965) and in detail by Rattey and
Sanderson (1984) that were later reaffirmed in studies by Alexander and
Shail (1995, 1996). Later extensional deformation reactivated many D1
and D2 structures and created new D3 structures (Alexander and Shail,
1996, 1995; Shail and Alexander, 1997). These events are summarised in
Table 1.

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:black;}
.tg th{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;font-weight:normal;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:black;}
.tg .tg-c3ow{border-color:inherit;text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-7btt{font-weight:bold;border-color:inherit;text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg">
<caption><i> Table 1 </i> Deformation events and structures relating to Variscan convergence (D1 and D2) and eventual extension (D3) with inferred kinematics with a schematic chronology. Compiled from Rattey et al. (1984), Alexander and Shail (1995), Alexander and Shail (1996), Shail and Aleander (1997), Hughes et al. (2009)</caption>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-7btt" colspan="2">Chronology</th>
    <th class="tg-7btt">Structures and Orientations</th>
    <th class="tg-7btt">Bulk Kinematics</th>
    <th class="tg-7btt">Interpretation</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow" rowspan="2">D1</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Low angle faults</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Tight-isoclinal folds (F1) verge NNW, pervasive axial planar cleavage (S1) dips gently SSE</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">NNW-directed thrusting</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Basin inversion and expulsion of thrust sheets (e.g. St Mellion Outlier)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">NW-SE faults</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Steep NW-SE faults, local dextral transpression</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">NW-SE dextral shear</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Transfer faults during locking of basins</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow" colspan="2">D2</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Open-close folds (F2) verge NNW, spaced axial planar cleavage (S2) dips moderately SSE</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">NNW-directed thrusting</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">"Out of sequence" thrusts associated with basin inversion closure</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow" rowspan="3">D3</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Distributed shear</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Localised folds (F3) verge SSE, axial planar cleavage (S3) dips moderately NNW</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow" rowspan="3">Top-to-the-SSE extension</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow" rowspan="3">Orogenic extension/collapse</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Detachments</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Synthetic extensional faults</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Brittle listric faults</td>
    <td class="tg-c3ow">Extensional faults dip SSE, slickenlines plunge SSE</td>
  </tr>
</table>

D1 structures are pervasive across the region displaying
thrust-associated E-W- to ENE-WSW-trending folds (F1) where the axial
planar cleavage (S1) is commonly sub-parallel to bedding (Alexander and
Shail, 1995; Rattey and Sanderson, 1984). D1 deformation is ubiquitous
with the first phase of Variscan deformation in the Gramscatho, Looe,
South Devon and Tavy basins (Holder and Leveridge, 1986; Hollick et al.,
2014; Isaac, 1985; Isaac et al., 1982; Leveridge and Hartley, 2006;
Leveridge et al., 1990, 2002, 2003; Rattey and Sanderson, 1984; Shail
and Leveridge, 2009). Further D1 structures include NW-SE transfer fault
zones discussed in detail below.

D2 deformation displays E-W- to ENE-WSW-trending F2 folds, similar to D1
deformation, but with a steeper cleavage (S2) which crenulates S1
fabrics (Alexander and Shail, 1995). The coaxial nature with D1
structures can vary up to 30&deg; anticlockwise resulting in
transpressive fabrics when in proximity to earlier, oblique basinal or
deformation structures (Leveridge and Hartley, 2006; Shail and
Leveridge, 2009). D2 structures also include narrow, high-strain shear
zones and are more intense to the south of the region (Alexander and
Shail, 1996, 1995; Rattey and Sanderson, 1984).

Deformation associated with the D3 event comprises extensional brittle
and ductile structures with top-to-the-SSE sense of movement. Ductile
structures are most commonly described within the parautochthonous
succession associated with the footwall of the Carrick Thrust (Alexander
and Shail, 1996, 1995; Shail and Alexander, 1997). The timing of D3
deformation is constrained by the intrusion of a lamprophyre into an
extensional fault zone at Toll Point \[SW 7912 2722\] suggesting that D3
initiated during the Stephanian indicating the cessation of collisional
Variscan deformation (Alexander and Shail, 1996). Work by Dupuis et al.
(2015) on lamprophyres in the Falmouth area corroborates the
post-collisional interpretation by Alexander and Shail (1996) but
indicates a Permian age, synchronous with granite magmatism.

### Thrust Tectonics

Variscan convergence led to the tectonic emplacement of a number of
nappes which were identified by Leveridge (1974) and further described
by Leveridge et al. (1990, 2002) and Leveridge (2008). The base of each
nappe is defined by a thrust fault, illustrated in
Figure 1, the lowest of these is the
Carrick Thrust and defines the limit of allochthonous terranes in SW
England. Other thrusts include the Veryan, Dodman and Lizard thrusts in
south Cornwall (Leveridge, 2008; Leveridge et al., 1990) and a thrust is
inferred at Start Point in south Devon (Coward and McClay, 1983). Each
thrust is associated with a nappe of a similar name comprising
allochthonous rocks that are generally thought to be of Rhenohercynian
affinity (Floyd et al., 1993; Shail and Leveridge, 2009). Of these
nappes the most unusual are the Lizard and Start nappes which are
characterised by "complexes".

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/ThrustsFigure.png" alt="Prettania">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 1</i> Thrust nappes in SW England resulting from Variscan convergence and
tectonically emplacing allochthonous terranes in south Cornwall
including the Lizard Complex. From Leveridge and Hartley (2006) after
Leveridge et al. (1990).
 </figcaption>
</figure>

The Lizard Complex comprises a suite of mafic to ultramafic rocks,
including serpentinised peridotites, gabbros, sheeted dolerite dykes
(Cook et al., 2000; Roberts et al., 1993). It is considered to represent
a section of obducted oceanic crust from within the Gramscatho Basin
(Leveridge and Shail, 2011). The complex is also intruded by a granite,
referred to as the Kennack Gneiss, which indicates that the evolution of
oceanic crust may not be simple. The tectonic setting during ocean crust
formation is still ambiguous and it may be that the Lizard Complex
represents oceanic crust from the Armorican/Normannian microcontinents
(Holder and Leveridge, 1986; Shail and Leveridge, 2009; Strachan et al.,
2014).

The Start Complex consists of hornblende-schists but their protolith and
structural affinity are uncertain. Floyd et al. (1993) attributes a
mid-ocean ridge affinity to a basic igneous protolith whereas Shail et
al. (2014) defines these as having a specific affinity to the Gramscatho
Basin, albeit an allochthonous part. The Dodman and Start thrusts may be
linked and indicate that the Devonian allochthonous rocks in the Dodman
Formation (metasandstones and mudstones with a schistose component)
underline a Rhenohercynian affinity (Hendriks, 1937; Leveridge, 2008),
alternatively, the Start Thrust, as part of the Start-Perranporth Zone,
may indicate proximity to the northern margin of the Gramscatho Basin.

### Strike-slip Faulting

Major oblique strike-slip faulting, first identified by Dearman (1963)
as wrench-faulting, is considered a D1 structure by Leveridge et al.
(2002) and Leveridge and Hartley (2006). The primary orientation of
these structures are NW-SE, with a subordinate NE-SW component, and have
been identified as a prominent feature of SW England geology (Dearman,
1970, 1963; Holloway and Chadwick, 1986; Jackson et al., 1989; Leveridge
et al., 2002; Peacock, 2004; Sanderson and Dearman, 1973; Scrivener,
2006; Walsh et al., 1987). Regional mapping of these features is
inconsistent and often shows sporadic faults; a compilation of regional
fault mapping is presented in
Figure 2.

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/FigureNWSEfaultsEdit.png" alt="Prettania">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 2</i> NW-SE regional fault mapping digitised and compiled from Dearman (1963),
Sanderson and Dearman (1973), Walsh et al. (1987) Jackson et al. (1989)
and Scrivener (2006). Individual mapping is rarely complete or
consistent with mapping by other authors. The compilation here provides
the best overview of the distribution of NW-SE faults across the region.
 </figcaption>
</figure>

It has been postulated by Le Gall (1991) that the structures may relate
to earlier Caledonian wrench structures, but the position of SW England
within the Rhenohercynian Zone at this time may preclude this theory.
Alternatively, NW-SE dextral faults may relate to the Bristol
Channel-Bray Fault Zone representing locking of the basins and are
associated with ductile tectonic reworking around 320 Ma (Leveridge and
Hartley, 2006; Matte, 1986). The structures have been regularly
reactivated and influence granite intrusions (Hughes, 2018; Powell,
2004), Triassic mineralisation (Craig, 2018; Morris, 2016; Scrivener et
al., 1994) and later Cenozoic deformation (Holloway and Chadwick,
1986).

The distribution of these NW-SE structures is poorly understood and many
maps are inconsistent. Mapping of faults in the 1:50 000 and 1:625 000
BGS digital mapping products share few common structures and maps
presented in other works such as Dearman (1963, 1970), Holdsworth
(1989), Jackson et al. (1989) and Scrivener (2006) are inconsistent.
More detailed studies have been compiled but only at a local scale and
these have not been correlated to regional structures (e.g. Powell,
2004; Craig, 2018; Hughes, 2018; Morris, 2016; Nixon et al., 2011).

The most studied NW-SE fault is the Sticklepath-Lustleight Fault Zone
which cuts the Dartmoor Granite and has been correlated through the
Celtic Sea and southern Ireland (Holloway and Chadwick, 1986; Le Gall,
1991). The fault zone comprises several traces of NW-SE faults that
demonstrate right-stepping and left-stepping traces and are associated
with the Cenozoic strike-slip basins of the Bovey and Petrockstow basins.
The mapping of several fault traces to other NW-SE faults has not been
detailed in other works, however, a map presented in Stanley and Criddle
(1990) represents a number of NW-SE faults as broad fracture zones
across the region. It is unlikely that single fault traces are truly
representative of strike-slip faulting in SW England given the presence
of strike-slip basin formation and the long strike extent inferred by
Holloway and Chadwick (1986) and Le Gall (1991). It is, however,
difficult to correlate other NW-SE faults and reconcile these to
distinct fault zones such as the postulated Porthtowan Fault Zone
(Craig, 2018; Dearman, 1963) and scope for reappraisal of these faults
remains.

### Variscan Extension

Extension of the Variscan Orogen, initiated in the Late Carboniferous
with D3 deformation, continued into the Early Permian (Alexander and
Shail, 1996, 1995; Shail and Alexander, 1997). Detailed descriptions of
extensional structures are made in Alexander and Shail (1995, 1996) and
are analysed to define three different stress regimes exhibited from
onshore rocks of south Cornwall (Shail and Alexander, 1997; Shail and
Wilkinson, 1994). These regimes are summarised in
Table 2. Some of the changes in
stress field described by Shail and Alexander (1997) correlate with
those inferred for the development of the offshore Plymouth and Melville
basins (Harvey et al., 1994; Hillis and Chapman, 1992). Furthermore, the
development of D4, D5 and D6 deformation structures through the Permian
and into the Triassic is detailed in
Figure 3.

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:black;}
.tg th{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;font-weight:normal;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:black;}
.tg .tg-baqh{text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-amwm{font-weight:bold;text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg">
<caption><i>Table 2</i> Summary table of Permian to Triassic deformation based on work by Alexander and Shail (1996) and Shail and Alexander (1997) which defined three reactivation episodes (D3, D4 and D5). Hughes (2018) infers continued deformation of D3 is key to accommodate granite emplacement with short-lived D4 before D5 deformation and a further D6 episode.</caption>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Chronology</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Structures and Orientations</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Bulk Kinematics</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Interpretation</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh">D3 (Continued)</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Extensional faults dip NNW, slickenlines plunge NNW</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">NNW-SSE extension</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Extension coeval with granite emplacement</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh">D4</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">ESE- and NE-striking high angle faults, ENE-striking subvertical tensile fractures, NNW-striking subvertical cleavage sporadically developed</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Dextral slip on NE-striking faults, sinistral slip on ESE-E striking faults</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Conjugate fractures relating to ENE-WSW shortening</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh"></td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">NW- and NNE-striking high angle faults, NNW- to N-striking subvertical tensile fractures and veins, sporadic E-striking cleavage</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Dextral slip on NW-striking faults, sinistral slip on NNE-striking faults</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">NNW-SSE shortening</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh">D5</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">NNW-striking high angle faults, subvertical tensile fractures/veins</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">NNW-striking steep tensile fractures with extensional pull-aparts</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">NNW-SSE shortening and/or ENE-WSW extension</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh">D6</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">NW-SE reactivation and inception of N-S faults with downthrow to the west</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">ENE-WSW extension</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Extension relating to cross-course mineralisation</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/structureCraigmodelsedit.png" alt="strucutre">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 3</i> Schematic illustrations of the kinematics and structures generated
during Variscan extension (D3-D6). Adapted from Craig (2018) after Shail
and Alexander (1997).
 </figcaption>
</figure>

Continued D3 deformation into the Permian developed high angle faults
coinciding with granite emplacement (Alexander and Shail, 1996, 1995;
Shail and Alexander, 1997). These structures are important in
accommodating the granite batholith. The development and reactivation of
NW-SE structures during the D3 episode also control pluton geometries
(Hughes, 2018).

The change in stress field during D4, from NNW-SSE extension to ENE-WSW
shortening, can be constrained from mineralisation relating to the
Camborne-Redruth Sn-Cu-W mineralisation (286.2 $\pm$ 0.5 Ma and 279.9
$\pm$ 0.8 Ma, Ar-Ar muscovite; Chen et al., 1993). Sn-W mineralisation
(272.3 $\pm$ 0.9 Ma and 268.4 $\pm$ 0.8 Ma, Ar-Ar muscovite; Chesley et
al., 1993) has been inferred to be later around Land's End, however,
this is in contrast to work by Tapster et al. (2017) who suggests Sn-W
mineralisation at Hemerdon (SW Dartmoor) to be polyphase and earlier.
The D4 episode generated ENE-trending dilatational structures with a
subset of strike-slip NE-SW and WNW-ESE faults (locally referred to as
"caunter lodes") which crosscut all previous structures (Shail and
Alexander, 1997).

D5 NNW-striking structures relate to the reactivation of Variscan
transfer faults during NNW-SSE shortening. The D5 episode is considered
to relate to intra-plate tectonics which may then extend into the
mid-Triassic (Shail and Alexander, 1997). Work on mineralisation in the
St Just Mining District by Hughes (2018) suggests that D5 was active in
the Middle Permian (c. 270 Ma). Field evidence from Bosigran (west
Cornwall) suggests the regional stress field changes rapidly from D3,
through D4 and into D5 (c. 2-3 Ma). Further evidence for early D5
deformation can be drawn from the magmatic-hydrothermal mineralisation
system in the St Just Mining District which contains NW-SE lode
structures (Hughes, 2018). Cross-cutting relationships at Ding-Dong Mine
can be observed between earlier ENE-WSW lodes and later NW-SE lodes;
mineralisation has yet to be dated at this locality.

Based on interpretations by Hughes (2018), ENE-WSW extension during the
Triassic is considered D6; constrained by mid-Triassic Pb-Zn-Ba
mineralisation (236 $\pm$ 3Ma, Sm-Nd; Scrivener et al., 1994). Extension
generated approximate N-S faults with downthrow to the west and is
considered to be temporally associated with the Ladinian-Carnian
boundary (Scrivener et al., 1994).

### References

Alexander, A.C., Shail, R.K., 1996. Late- to post-Variscan structures on
the coast between Penzance and Pentewan, South Cornwall. Proceedings of
the Ussher Society 9, 72--78.

Alexander, A.C., Shail, R.K., 1995. Late Variscan structures on the
coast between Perranporth and St. Ives, Cornwall. Proceedings of the
Ussher Society 8, 398--404.

Chen, Y., Clark, A.H., Farrar, E., Wasteneys, H.A.H.P., Hodgson, M.J.,
Bromley, A.V., 1993. Diachronous and independent histories of plutonism
and mineralization in the Cornubian Batholith, southwest England.
Journal of the Geological Society, London 150, 1183--1191.

Chesley, J.T., Halliday, A.N., Snee, L.W., Mezger, K., Shepherd, T.J.,
Scrivener, R.C., 1993. Thermochronology of the Cornubian batholith in
southwest England: Implications for pluton emplacement and protracted
hydrothermal mineralization. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 57,
1817--1835.

Cook, C.A., Holdsworth, R.E., Styles, M.T., Pearce, J.A., 2000.
Pre-emplacement structural history recorded by mantle peridotites: an
example from the Lizard Complex, SW England. Journal of the Geological
Society, London 157, 1049--1064.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/jgs.157.5.1049>

Coward, M.P., McClay, K.R., 1983. Thrust tectonics of S Devon. Journal
of the Geological Society, London 140, 215--228.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.140.2.0215>

Craig, F.D.A., 2018. The characterisation of Cornish crosscourses (MSc
Dissertation). University of Exeter.

Darbyshire, D.P.F., Shepherd, T.J., 1985. Chronology of granite
magmatism and associated mineralization, SW England. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 142, 1159--1177.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.142.6.1159>

Dearman, W.R., 1970. Some aspects of the tectonic evolution of
South-West England. Proceedings of the Geologists' Association 81,
483--491. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-7878(70)80009-8>

Dearman, W.R., 1963. Wrench-faulting in Cornwall and south Devon.
Proceedings of the Geologists' Association 74, 265--287.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-7878(63)80023-1>

Dupuis, N.E., Braid, J.A., Murphy, J.B., Shail, R.K., Archibald, D.A.,
Nance, R.D., 2015. 40 Ar/ 39 Ar phlogopite geochronology of lamprophyre
dykes in Cornwall, UK: new age constraints on Early Permian
post-collisional magmatism in the Rhenohercynian Zone, SW England.
Journal of the Geological Society 172, 566--575.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/jgs2014-151>

Floyd, P.A., Holdsworth, R.E., Steele, S.A., 1993. Geochemistry of the
Start Complex greenschists: Rhenohercynian MORB? Geological Magazine
130, 345--352. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0016756800020021>

Hartley, A.J., Warr, L.N., 1990. Upper Carboniferous foreland basin
evolution in SW Britain. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 7, 212--216.

Harvey, M.J., Stewart, S.A., Wilkinson, J.J., Ruffell, A.H., Shail,
R.K., 1994. Tectonic evolution of the Plymouth Bay Basin. Proceedings of
the Ussher Society 8, 271--278.

Hendriks, E.M.L., 1937. Rock succession and structure in south Cornwall:
a revision with notes on the Central European facies and Variscan
folding there present. Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society,
London 93, 322--367.

Hillis, R.R., Chapman, T.J., 1992. Variscan structure and its influence
on post-Carboniferous basin development Western Approaches Basin, SW UK
Continental Shelf. Journal of the Geological Society, London 149,
413--417.

Holder, M.T., Leveridge, B.E., 1986. A model for the tectonic evolution
of south Cornwall. Journal of the Geological Society, London 143,
125--134. <https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.143.1.0125>

Holdsworth, R.E., 1989. Short Paper: The Start-Perranporth line: a
Devonian terrane boundary in the Variscan orogen of SW England? Journal
of the Geological Society, London 146, 419--421.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.146.3.0419>

Hollick, L.M., Scrivener, R.C., Burt, C.E., 2014. Geology of the Newquay
district - a brief explanation of the geological map. Sheet Explanation
of the British Geological Survey. 1:50 000 Sheet 346 Newquay (England;
Wales).

Holloway, S., Chadwick, R.A., 1986. The Sticklepath-Lustleigh fault
zone: Tertiary sinistral reactivation of a Variscan dextral strike-slip
fault. Journal of the Geological Society, London 143, 447--452.

Hughes, S.P., 2018. The tectonomagmatic evolution of the Land's End
Granite (Unpublished PhD Thesis). University of Exeter.

Hughes, S.P., Stickland, R.J., Shail, R.K., LeBoutillier, N.G.,
Alexander, A.C., Thomas, M., 2009. The chronology and kinematics of Late
Palaeozoic deformation in the NW contact metamorphic aureole of the
Land's End Granite. Geoscience in South-West England 12, 140--152.

Isaac, K.P., 1985. Thrust and nappe tectonics of west Devon. Proceedings
of the Geologists' Association 96, 109--127.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-7878(85)80062-6>

Isaac, K.P., Turner, P.J., Stewart, I.J., 1982. The evolution of the
Hercynides of central SW England. Journal of the Geological Society,
London 139, 521--531. <https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.139.4.0521>

Jackson, N.J., Willis-Richards, J., Manning, D.A.C., Sams, M.S., 1989.
Evolution of the Cornubian ore field, Southwest England; Part II,
Mineral deposits and ore-forming processes. Economic Geology 84,
1101--1133.

Le Gall, B., 1991. Crustal evolutionary model for the Variscides of
Ireland and Wales from SWAT seismic data. Journal of the Geological
Society, London 148, 759--774.

Leveridge, B.E., 2008. Geology of the Mevagissey district - a brief
explanation of the geological map. Memoir of the British Geological
Survey, Sheet 353. England; Wales.

Leveridge, B.E., 1974. The tectonics of the Roseland coastal section,
south Cornwall (Unpublished PhD Thesis). University of
Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Leveridge, B.E., Hartley, A.J., 2006. The Varisan Orogeny: the
development and deformation of Devonian/Carboniferous basins in SW
England and South Wales, in: Brenchley, P.J., Rawson, P.F. (Eds.), The
Geology of England and Wales. The Geological Society, London, pp.
225--256.

Leveridge, B.E., Holder, M.T., Day, G.A., 1984. Thrust nappe tectonics
in the Devonian of south Cornwall and the western English Channel.
Geological Society, London, Special Publications 14, 103--112.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/GSL.SP.1984.014.01.09>

Leveridge, B.E., Holder, M.T., Goode, A.J.J., 1990. Geology of the
country around Falmouth. Memoir of the British Geological Survey, Sheet
352. England; Wales.

Leveridge, B.E., Holder, M.T., Goode, A.J.J., Scrivener, R.C., Jones,
N.S., Merriman, R.J., 2002. Geology of the Plymouth and south-east
Cornwall area. Memoir of the British Geological Survey, Sheet 348.
England; Wales.

Leveridge, B.E., Scrivener, R.C., Goode, A.J.J., Merriman, R.J., 2003.
The geology of the Torquay district. Memoir of the British Geological
Survey, Sheet 350. England; Wales.

Leveridge, B.E., Shail, R.K., 2011. The Gramscatho Basin, south
Cornwall, UK: Devonian active margin successions. Proceedings of the
Geologists' Association 122, 568--615.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pgeola.2011.03.004>

Lloyd, G.E., Chinnery, N., 2002. The Bude Formation, SW England -
three-dimensional, intra-formational Variscan imbricate stack? Journal
of Structural Geology 24, 1259--1280.

Matte, P., 1986. Tectonics and plate tectonics model for the Variscan
belt of Europe. Tectonophysics 126, 329--374.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-1951(86)90237-4>

Morris, D., 2016. An Integrative Study into the Structural Controls of
Pb-Zn Mineralisation in the North Devon Basin using Tellus South-West
Project Data: Combe Martin, Devon (MSc Dissertation). Camborne School of
Mines, University of Exeter.

Nixon, C.W., Sanderson, D.J., Bull, J.M., 2011. Deformation within a
strike-slip fault network at Westward Ho!, Devon U.K.: Domino vs
conjugate faulting. Journal of Structural Geology 33, 833--843.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsg.2011.03.009>

Peacock, D.C.P., 2004. The post-Variscan development of the British
Isles within a regional transfer zone influenced by orogenesis. Journal
of Structural Geology 26, 2225--2231.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsg.2004.05.005>

Powell, T., 2004. The anatomy of a pluton - a petrological investigation
into the Land's End Granite (Unpublished MPhil Thesis). University of
Derby.

Rattey, P.R., Sanderson, D.J., 1984. The structure of SW Cornwall and
its bearing on the emplacement of the Lizard Complex. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 141, 87--95.

Roberts, S., Andrews, J.R., Bull, J.M., Sanderson, D.J., 1993.
Slow-spreading ridge-axis tectonics: evidence from the Lizard complex,
UK. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 116, 101--112.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/0012-821X(93)90047-D>

Sanderson, D.J., 1984. Structural variation across the northern margin
of the Variscides in NW Europe. Geological Society, London, Special
Publications 14, 149--165.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/GSL.SP.1984.014.01.15>

Sanderson, D.J., Dearman, W.R., 1973. Structural zones of the Variscan
fold belt in SW England, their location and development. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 129, 527--536.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.129.5.0527>

Scrivener, R.C., 2006. Cornubian granites and mineralization of SW
England, in: Brenchley, P.J., Rawson, P.F. (Eds.), The Geology of
England and Wales. The Geological Society, London, pp. 257--268.

Scrivener, R.C., Darbyshire, D.P.F., Shepherd, T.J., 1994. Timing and
significance of crosscourse mineralization in SW England. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 151, 587--590.

Selwood, E.B., 1990. A review of basin development in central south-west
England. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 7, 199--205.

Shackleton, R.M., 1984. Thin-skinned tectonics, basement control and the
Variscan front. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 14,
125--129. <https://doi.org/10.1144/GSL.SP.1984.014.01.12>

Shackleton, R.M., Ries, A.C., Coward, M.P., 1982. An interpretation of
the Variscan structures in SW England. Journal of the Geological
Society, London 139, 533--541.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.139.4.0533>

Shail, R.K., Alexander, A.C., 1997. Late Carboniferous to Triassic
reactivation of Variscan basement in the western English Channel:
evidence from onshore exposures in south Cornwall. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 154, 163--168.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.154.1.0163>

Shail, R.K., Leveridge, B.E., 2009. The Rhenohercynian passive margin of
SW England: Development, inversion and extensional reactivation. Comptes
Rendus Geoscience 341, 140--155.

Shail, R.K., Wilkinson, J.J., 1994. Late-to Post-Variscan extensional
tectonics in south Cornwall. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 8,
262--270.

Shail, R., Scrivener, R., Simons, B., Müller, A., Andersen, J.,
Williamson, B.J., Halls, C., Hughes, S., 2014. Early Permian
post-Variscan magmatism, in: Shail, R., Andersen, J., Simons, B.,
Williamson, B.J. (Eds.), EUROGRANITES 2014: Granites and Mineralisation
of Sw England. Field Excursion Guidebook 12th-18th July 2014, pp.
14--36.

Smith, M.A.P., 1965. Repeated folding between Hayle and Portreath.
Proceedings of the Ussher Society 1, 170--171.

Stanley, C.J., Criddle, A.J., 1990. Precious and Base Metal Selenide
Mineralization at Hope's Nose, Torquay, Devon. Mineralogical Magazine
54, 485--493.

Strachan, R.A., Linnemann, U., Jeffries, T., Drost, K., Ulrich, J.,
2014. Armorican provenance for the mélange deposits below the Lizard
ophiolite (Cornwall, UK): Evidence for Devonian obduction of Cadomian
and Lower Palaeozoic crust onto the southern margin of Avalonia.
International Journal of Earth Sciences 103, 1359--1383.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s00531-013-0961-x>

Tapster, S., Shail, R.K., McAllister, H., Deady, E., McFarlane, J.,
2017. Understanding the multi-episode formation of the world-class
Hemerdon W--Sn deposit in the context of SW England granite evolution.
Applied Earth Science Transactions of the Institutions of Mining and
Metallurgy: Section B 7453.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03717453.2017.1306298>

Walsh, P.T., Atkinson, K., Boulter, M.C., Shakesby, R.A., 1987. The
Oligocene and Miocene outliers of west Cornwall and their bearing on the
geomorphological evolution of Oldland Britain. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Section A: Mathematical &
Physical Sciences 323, 211--245.
<https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.1987.0082>

Whittaker, A., Leveridge, B.E., 2011. The North Devon Basin: a Devonian
passive margin shelf succession. Proceedings of the Geologists'
Association 122, 718--744.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pgeola.2011.03.006>

Wilkinson, J.J., Knight, R.R.W., 1989. Short Paper: Palynological
evidence from the Porthleven area, south Cornwall: implications for
Devonian stratigraphy and Hercynian structural evolution. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 146, 739--742.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.146.5.0739>
