---
title: Mineralisation in SW England

# View.
#   1 = List
#   2 = Compact
#   3 = Card
#   4 = Citation
view: 3

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""

summary: The formation of a world-class tin-tungsten orefield
weight: 50
---
SW England hosts the Cornubian Orefield, a world-class Sn-W-Cu province
with subordinate As, Fe, Pb-Zn-Ag, U-Ni-Co and Sb-Au mineralisation as
well as a number of other metal occurrences. Furthermore, the industrial
mineral kaolinite has been mined extensively across the region. A
summary of the major mining districts of SW England is presented in
Figure 1.

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/FigureSWmineralisationEdit.png" alt="SWEmineralisation">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 1</i> Distribution of mineralisation in SW England and the associated historic
mining districts. Redrawn from Shail et al. (2014) and based on Dines
(1956).
 </figcaption>
</figure>

Mineralisation is intrinsically linked to the structural geology of the
area with the vast majority of deposits showing some degree of
structural control. The development of the regional fault network and
relationship to mineralised structures is illustrated in
the [Variscan Tectonics]({{<ref "03_Variscan.md" >}}) section and based on
work by Shail and Alexander (1997) and Craig (2018). These are broadly
aligned with the tectonic models of Hughes (2018), however,
special exception surrounds the timing of D5 structures and
mineralisation in the St Just Mining District.

Base metal Devonian-Carboniferous deposits are related to either
Volcanic Massive Sulphide (VMS) or SEDimentary EXhalative (SEDEX) style
mineralisation and orogenic gold deposits with Sb-Au associated with the
Variscan Orogeny. The Permian mineralisation is largely
magmatic-hydrothermal and associated with the Cornubian granite
batholith. Polymetallic (Sn-Cu-As) lode orientations reflect the
regional stress field resulting in NNW-SSE extension for the majority of
the lodes, whereas mineralisation on the NW margin of the Land's End
Granite may reflect a change in the regional stress field to ENE-WSW
extension (Hughes, 2018; Shail and Alexander, 1997; Shail et al., 2003).
Further extension into the Triassic likely reactivated major NW-SE
faults connected to Permo-Triassic basins that aided the low-temperature
base metal cross-course mineralisation and oblique extension opened the
N-S to NNW-SSE structures for mineralisation (Craig, 2018).

### Devonian to Carboniferous Mineralisation

Devonian to Carboniferous mineralisation occurred as part of the passive
margin succession often forming as small, stratabound deposits of
variably concentrated base metals (Leake et al., 1985). Occurrences are
often sporadic and difficult to trace along strike resulting in low
tonnages. It has been suggested by Jackson et al. (1989) that these
deposits could be a significant source of metals for later Permian and
Triassic mineralisation. Rift-related, extensional massive sulphide
mineralisation across Europe suggests these deposits may be prevalent in
pre-Variscan rocks of SW England (Sawkins and Burke, 1980).

Much of the Devonian to Carboniferous mineralisation shows complex
structures and mineral textures indicating that the deposits are likely
to have been remobilised either during Permian or Triassic
mineralisation events. The South Hams of Devon have been extensively
explored for massive sulphide deposits, both VMS and SEDEX deposit types
relating to Devonian rifting (Leake et al., 1985, 1992; Leake and
Norton, 1993) and small Cu-Pb-Zn mineralisation in the Tamar Valley has
been attributed to Devonian-Carboniferous VMS mineralisation similar to
that of the Iberian Pyrite Belt (Benham et al., 2004). The North Devon
Basin has been identified as hosting SEDEX mineralisation similar to the
ores found in the Rheinisches Schiefergebirge in Germany (Scrivener and
Bennett, 1980) and has been compared to SEDEX mineralisation at
Rammelsberg (Benham et al., 2004). However, structural mapping of vein
sets and associated fluid inclusion analysis has identified a Triassic
origin to the mineralising fluids (Morris, 2016).

Some deposits, such as the Sb-Au mineralisation at Wadebridge, has an
orogenic gold mineralisation style which was identified by Clayton et
al. (1990) through fluid inclusion analysis. However, some lode
structures in the area, suggested by Jackson et al. (1989) to be of
cross-course origin, show a more diverse suite of metals and a more
complex mineral assemblage including sulphosalts such as bournonite.
Clayton et al. (1990) infer higher temperature mineralisation, similar
to the Sb-Au veins despite a different fluid chemistry, and attribute
sulphosalt formation to basalt decarbonisation during Variscan
metamorphism (Clayton, 1993).

Early mineralisation in SW England is therefore diverse, wide-spread,
and likely to have undergone significant remobilisation. This is
highlighted by further major structures such as the Perran Iron Lode,
described in detail by Scrivener et al. (2006), which shows Devonian
SEDEX mineralisation, Variscan metamorphism, Permian metasomatism and
Triassic remobilisation. Deposits are often small, but their
significance as a source of metals for later mineralisation events
should not be overlooked.

### Permian Mineralisation

Permian mineralisation is dominated by magmatic-hydrothermal fluids
directly associated with the emplacement of the Cornubian Batholith.
Detailed studies of fluid inclusions form various mineralised areas in
SW England have demonstrated that metamorphic, magmatic, hydrothermal
and meteoric fluid phases have influenced mineralisation at different
times in SW England with five primary fluids identified (Wilkinson,
1991, 1990; Wilkinson et al., 1995). Of these, a magmatic-hydrothermal
fluid dominates Permian mineralisation (Fluid 3; Wilkinson et al.,
1995). Shail et al. (2003) postulated that mantle-derived volatiles as
part of a magmatic fluid component may be a key part of Cu and S
enrichment in the region.

The fault network created largely during Variscan convergence and later
extension, combined with the generation of multiple fluid phases and the
extended period of granite magmatism, weakened the crust and allowed the
pervading extensional stress regime to create dilatory fractures and a
highly permeable rock mass (Jackson et al., 1989; Shail and Alexander,
1997; Shail et al., 2003; Willis-Richards and Jackson, 1989). There are
three stages to Permian magmatic-hydrothermal mineralisation as defined
by Chesley et al. (1993), these are described in
Table 1. The
stages group together different deposit types that largely reflect the
changing metal assemblage and may be a reflection of cooling
temperatures. A chronology is implicit, but may vary across the region
due to diachronous granite emplacement (see
Section [\[sec:PermianMagmatism\]](#04_Permian)).

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:black;}
.tg th{font-family:Arial, sans-serif;font-size:14px;font-weight:normal;padding:10px 5px;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;overflow:hidden;word-break:normal;border-color:black;}
.tg .tg-baqh{text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-amwm{font-weight:bold;text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg">
	<caption><i>Table 2</i>i> Summary table of Permian mineralisation styles grouped by stage based on
Chesley et al. (1993) and compiled from various sources. 1 - Ussher et
al. (1909), 2 - Dines (1956), 3 - Hall (1971), 4 - Jackson (1974), 5 -
Jackson and Alderton (1974), 6 - N. J. Jackson (1975a), 7 - N. J.
Jackson (1975b), 8 - J McM Moore and N Jackson (1977), 9 - Jackson et
al. (1977), 10 - Allman-Ward et al. (1982), 11 - Beer and Scrivener
(1982), 12 - Jackson et al. (1982), 13 - Shepherd et al. (1985), 14 -
Scrivener et al. (1986), 15 - Bromley and Holl (1986), 16 - Scrivener et
al. (1987), 17 - Jackson et al. (1989), 18 - Chesley et al. (1993), 19 -
Dominy et al. (1995), 20 - Dominy et al. (1996), 21 - Camm and Dominy
(1997), 22 - Camm and Dominy (1999), 23 - Shail et al. (2003), 24 -
Scrivener (2006).</caption>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Stage</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Style</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Economic Metals</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Gangue Minerals</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Temp. (°C)</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Examples</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Comments</th>
    <th class="tg-amwm">Sources</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh">1</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Skarns</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Fe, Cu, Sn</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Garnet, pyroxene, tourmaline, amphibole, axinite</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">375-450</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Grylls Bunny, Land's End; Treliver Farm, St Columb; Haytor, Dartmoor</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Close proximity to granite</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">1, 4, 5, 12, 16, 18, 21, 22</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh">2</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Pegmatites</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Sn, W ±Mo</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Quartz, feldspar, muscovite, tourmaline</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">300-500</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Megilligar Rocks</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">As, Mo, W, Sn, Bi aplite-pegmatite assemblages</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">15, 17, 18</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh"></td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Sheeted greisen veins</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Sn, W</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Quartz, muscovite, tourmaline</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">300-500</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">St Michael's Mount, Cligga Head, Hemerdon</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Rare occurrences of Cu, Fe and Sn, native Bi observed at St Michael's Mount</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">3, 8, 9, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh"></td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Tourmaline-bearing veins, lodes, breccia pipes and carbonas</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Sn, W</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Quartz, muscovite, tourmaline</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">300-500</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Veins and Lodes - 'Numbered Lodes', South Crofty; Birch Tor and Vitifer, Dartmoor. Breccia pipe - Wheal Remfry; St Austell. Carbonas - Levant, St Ives and Wheal Roots, Wendron</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Cassiterite-bearing quartz-tourmaline veins, deficient in sulphides when proximal to the granite. Breccia pipes can host cassiterite and rutile.</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">6, 7, 10, 13, 17, 18, 20, 24</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-baqh">3</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Sn-bearing polymetallic lodes</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Sn, Cu, Pb, Zn, As, Fe</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Quartz, feldspar, chlorite, haematite, fluorite</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">200-400</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Wheal Pendarves and Great Flat Lode, Camborne-Redruth district; St Agnes district</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">Complex history and overprint previous mineralisation. Generally trend ENE-WSW to E-W. NW-SE lodes occur at Land's End</td>
    <td class="tg-baqh">2, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18, 23, 24</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Skarn mineralisation, also known as calc-silicate or "calc-flinta"
mineralisation, forms a small portion of the total mineralisation
related to Permian magmatic-hydrothermal activity and are often small,
low-grade deposits (Jackson et al., 1989). Skarns are found in close
proximity to the granite contact and have been described across the
peninsula (e.g. Ussher et al., 1909; Camm and Dominy, 1999, 1997;
Jackson, 1974; Jackson and Alderton, 1974; Jackson et al., 1982;
Scrivener et al., 1987). The protolith prior to skarn mineralisation is
usually considered to be a basic igneous intrusion (most likely of
Devonian age) where tin mineralisation is often associated with
tourmaline and chlorite (Jackson, 1974; Jackson and Alderton, 1974;
Jackson et al., 1982).

Mineralised pegmatites are sparse and few have been worked economically.
The best examples exist at Megiliggar Rocks where assemblages of
lollingite, arsenopyrite and molybdenite with wolframite, cassiterite
and native Bi have been noted within banded aplite-pegmatites (Breiter
et al., 2018; Bromley and Holl, 1986). Tourmaline-bearing veins, lodes,
breccia pipes and carbonas are more widespread. Tourmaline-bearing veins
and lodes often host Sn and are pervasive although the best examples can
be found at Birch Tor and Vitifer in the Dartmoor Granite (Shepherd et
al., 1985) and the "Numbered Lodes" at South Crofty Tin Mine (Jackson et
al., 1989; Williamson et al., 2010). Breccia pipes and carbonas are more
rare, the most famous being those at Wheal Remfry breccia pipe
(Allman-Ward et al., 1982) and the extensive carbona mineralisation
exploited in the Wendron Mining District (Dominy et al., 1996; Jackson,
1975; Jackson et al., 1989).

Greisen vein systems, commonly referred to as sheeted vein systems,
occur in cupola intrusions such as St Michael's Mount, Cligga Head and
Hemerdon or in the carapace of larger intrusions such as at Bostraze and
Goonbarrow in the Land's End and St Austell granites, respectively
(Dominy et al., 1995; Jackson et al., 1989). The centre of greisen veins
are generally composed of quartz and host metalliferous ores minerals
such as wolframite and to a lesser extent cassiterite with accessory
arsenopyrite (Hall, 1971; Jackson et al., 1977, 1989; Moore and Jackson,
1977). Sulphide minerals such as chalcopyrite and pyrite as well as
stannite and native bismuth are also found in some deposits such as St
Michael's Mount (Dominy et al., 1995). Fluid inclusion data imply that,
whilst showing structural simplicity, mineralisation may have been
complex with a broad temperature range and distinct mixing of variable
salinity fluids (Dominy et al., 1995). Furthermore, the Hemerdon deposit
appears to be distinct from Cligga Head and St Michael's Mount in that
it has multiple vein sets and is largely deficient in arsenopyrite.
Fluid inclusion studies also indicate a vapour phase separation which is
unique to the deposit (Shepherd et al., 1985).

Polymetallic lodes display a complex history of magmatic-hydrothermal
activity (Jackson et al., 1989; Scrivener, 2006). The lodes are
dominated by generally high angle extensional faults or cavities but can
be lower angle (e.g. Great Flat Lode, Camborne-Redruth Mining District).
These lodes generally trend ENE-WSW to E-W although local variations
occur such as NW-SE lodes on the northern margin of the Land's End
Granite (Dines, 1956; Jackson et al., 1989; Shepherd et al., 1985). Some
areas show that polymetallic mineralisation overprints previous sheeted
greisen veins or tourmaline-bearing Sn veins (Dines, 1956) demonstrating
it is likely to be a later mineralisation event at the deposit scale.

### Triassic Mineralisation

Triassic mineralisation is characterised by N-S to NNW-SSE trending
cross-course mineralisation and forms an important deposit type for low
temperature base metals, particularly Pb and Zn (Jackson et al., 1989;
Scrivener et al., 1994). Lodes from the Tamar Valley have been dated by
Rb-Sr isotope analysis of fluid inclusions. The study of N-S trending
Pb-Zn-F mineralisation in the area yielded an age of 236 $\pm$ 3 Ma
(Scrivener et al., 1994). Fluid inclusions demonstrate an affinity to
oil-field brines with an evaporitic origin and most likely sourced from
the Permo-Triassic basins (Gleeson et al., 2000, 2001; Scrivener et al.,
1994). An evaporitic source infers seawater incursion which has been
correlated to the Late Triassic (Gleeson et al., 2001), however, this
may also indicate the Rb-Sr dating by Scrivener et al. (1994) requires
refinement. The N-S to NNW-SSE structures are spatially related to
significant NW-SE dextral faults; partial reactivation along these
faults during Triassic extension may have acted as a fluid pathway from
the sedimentary basins (Gleeson et al., 2000; Jackson et al., 1989;
Stanley and Criddle, 1990).

The source of metals for Triassic mineralisation is unproven. The highly
variable nature described by Craig (2018) may be a reflection of local
controls on mineralisation (Gleeson et al., 2000). Local variations
include Sb-bearing cross-courses in the Loddiswell area and at
Herodsfoot Mine (Dines, 1956; Stanley and Criddle, 1990) which may be
the result of remobilisation of earlier Devonian-Carboniferous Sb
mineralisation similar to the Wadebridge area (Clayton et al., 1990).
Other areas have been worked for U, Co and Ni which often occur proximal
to granite plutons including mines such as South Terras, Dolcoath (South
Crofty Mine), Roskrow United, East Pool and Agar, Great Dowgas, St
Austell Consol, Chance, Pengelly and Fowey Consols (Dines, 1956); all of
which are close to the granite margin. The variation based on the
proximity to granite may indicate that the batholith may have provided a
heat source necessary for an extended period of mineralisation (Jackson
et al., 1989; Tammemagi and Smith, 1975; Tammemagi and Wheildon, 1974).
Fluid inclusion studies at Porthleven and Menheniot support the
suggestion of a heat source external to the source basins (Gleeson et
al., 2000) and it is likely that tectonic activity was a major
contribution to mobilising the fluids and creating permissive fractures.

### Granite Kaolinisation

Kaolinite is an industrial mineral that has been mined historically from
most of the granite plutons and remains an important commodity, however,
production is now limited to the St Austell Granite and SW Dartmoor at
Lee Moor. Economic deposits of kaolinised granite in SW England are not
pervasive and generally associated with multiple intrusions and major
fault zones (Jackson et al., 1989; Scrivener, 2006). Studies of
kaolinisation mechanisms are focussed on the St Austell Granite; the
main extractive centre. Early interpretations suggested that
kaolinisation was a supergene process (Sheppard, 1977). Jackson et al.
(1989) postulated a hydrothermal component to kaolinisation, however, it
was not until extensive research by Psyrillos et al. (2003) that a
mineralisation model was developed
(Figure 2. Work by
Psyrillos et al. (2003) resulted in a new model where hydrothermal
kaolinite formed in extensional open fractures within the granite body
at temperatures between 50 to 100 $^{\circ}$C and approximately 1 km
depth. The hydrothermal activity is considered to be of mid-Jurassic age
and relate to early Atlantic rifting. Unroofing in the Cretaceous
allowed the percolation of meteoric fluids resulting in subsequent
supergene alteration and re-equilibration of hydrogen isotopes.

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/KaoliniteModel.jpg" alt="KaoliniteModel">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 2</i> Kaolinisation of granites in SW England from Psyrillos et al. (2003)
demonstrating the requirement of meteoric water and basinal brines
convecting through plutons.
 </figcaption>
</figure>

The model of Cretaceous unroofing for the St Austell Granite is based on
the assumption that unroofing of the Dartmoor Granite is synchronous.
The evidence of Cretaceous unroofing of the Dartmoor Granite is based on
detrital studies in the English Channel (Cosgrove and Salter, 1966),
however, conglomerates near Newton St Cyres \[SX 8829 9981\] show felsic
clasts of presumed Dartmoor affinity and have been dated using
palynomorphs to mid- to late-Permian (Dangerfield and Hawkes, 1969;
Edwards, 1999; Scrivener and McVicar Wright, 2014). Therefore it is
likely that two phases of unroofing occurred, although, this does not
preclude the possibility that the St Austell Granite was indeed unroofed
later, during the Cretaceous.

### References

Allman-Ward, P., Halls, C., Rankin, A.H., Bristow, C.M., 1982. An
intrusive hydrothermal breccia body at Wheal Remfry in the western part
of the St Austell granite pluton, Cornwall, in: Evans, A.M. (Ed.),
Metallization Associated with Acid Magmatism. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, pp.
1--28.

Benham, A.J., McEvoy, F.M., Rollin, K.E., 2004. Potential for stratiform
massive sulphide mineralisation in south-west England. Applied Earth
Science 113, 227--246. <https://doi.org/10.1179/174327504X27215>

Breiter, K., Ďurišová, J., Hrstka, T., Korbelová, Z., Vašinová Galiová,
M., Müller, A., Simons, B., Shail, R., Williamson, B., Davies, J., 2018.
The transition from granite to banded aplite-pegmatite sheet complexes:
An example from Megiliggar rocks, Tregonning topaz granite, Cornwall.
Lithos 303, 370--388. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lithos.2018.01.010>

Bromley, A.V., Holl, J., 1986. Tin mineralisation in southwest England,
in: Wills, B.A., Barley, R.W. (Eds.), Mineral Processing at a
Crossroads: Problems and Prospects. Martinus Nijhoff, Lancaster, pp.
195--262.

Camm, G.S., Dominy, S.C., 1999. Tin mineralization and structure at
Treliver, St. Austell, mid-Cornwall. Geoscience in South-West England 9,
370--373.

Camm, G.S., Dominy, S.C., 1997. Metasediment-hosted tin mineralization
in the Indian Queens area, mid-Cornwall. Proceedings of the Ussher
Society 9, 211--214.

Chesley, J.T., Halliday, A.N., Snee, L.W., Mezger, K., Shepherd, T.J.,
Scrivener, R.C., 1993. Thermochronology of the Cornubian batholith in
southwest England: Implications for pluton emplacement and protracted
hydrothermal mineralization. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 57,
1817--1835.

Clayton, R., 1993. Basalt carbonatisation and its implications for
antimony mineralisation in north Cornwall. Proceedings of the Ussher
Society 8, 105--111.

Clayton, R.E., Scrivener, R.C., Stanley, C.J., 1990. Mineralogical and
preliminary fluid inclusion studies of lead-antimony mineralisation in
north Cornwall. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 7, 258--262.

Cosgrove, M.E., Salter, D.L., 1966. The stratigraphic distribution of
kaolinite in the post-Armorican formations of south-west England.
Proceedings of the Ussher Society 1, 249--252.

Craig, F.D.A., 2018. The characterisation of Cornish crosscourses (MSc
Dissertation). University of Exeter.

Dangerfield, J., Hawkes, J.R., 1969. Unroofing of the Dartmoor Granite
and possible consequences with regard to mineralization. Proceedings of
the Ussher Society 2, 122--131.

Dines, H.G., 1956. The Metalliferous mining region of south-west
England. Economic Memoirs of the Geological Survey of Great Britain.

Dominy, S.C., Camm, G.S., Bussell, M.A., 1996. Characteristics and
development of carbona-style replacement tin mineralization in west
Cornwall. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 9, 97--104.

Dominy, S.C., Camm, G.S., Bussell, M.A., Bennett, T.S., 1995. The
structure and paragenetic evolution of cassiterite mineralized veins at
Rosevale Mine, Zennor, West Cornwall. Proceedings of the Ussher Society
8, 374--378.

Edwards, R.A., 1999. The Minehead District - A Concise Account of the
Geology. Memoir of the British Geological Survey, Sheet 278; part of
294. England; Wales.

Gleeson, S.A., Wilkinson, J.J., Shaw, H.F., Herrington, R.J., 2000.
Post-magmatic hydrothermal circulation and the origin of base metal
mineralization, Cornwall, UK. Journal of the Geological Society, London
157, 589--600. <https://doi.org/10.1144/jgs.157.3.589>

Gleeson, S.A., Wilkinson, J.J., Stuart, F.M., Banks, D.A., 2001. The
origin and evolution of base metal mineralising brines and hydrothermal
fluids, South Cornwall, UK. Geochimica et Cosochimica Acta 65,
2067--2079.

Hall, A., 1971. Greisenisation in the granite of Cligga Head, Cornwall.
Proceedings of the Geologists' Association 82, 209--230.

Hughes, S.P., 2018. The tectonomagmatic evolution of the Land's End
Granite (Unpublished PhD Thesis). University of Exeter.

Jackson, N.J., 1975. "Carbonas" - a review. Proceedings of the Ussher
Society 3, 218--219.

Jackson, N.J., 1974. Grylls Bunny, a "tin floor" at Botallack.
Proceedings of the Ussher Society 3, 186--188.

Jackson, N.J., Alderton, D.H.M., 1974. Discordant calc-silicate bodies
in the Botallack area. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 3, 123--127.

Jackson, N.J., Halliday, A.N., Sheppard, S.M.F., Mitchell, J.G., 1982.
Hydrothermal Activity in the St Just Mining District, Cornwall, England,
in: Evans, A.M. (Ed.), Metallization Associated with Acid Magmatism.
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, pp. 137--180.

Jackson, N.J., Moore, J.M., Rankin, A.H., 1977. Fluid inclusions and
mineralization at Cligga Head, Cornwall, England. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 134, 343--349.

Jackson, N.J., Willis-Richards, J., Manning, D.A.C., Sams, M.S., 1989.
Evolution of the Cornubian ore field, Southwest England; Part II,
Mineral deposits and ore-forming processes. Economic Geology 84,
1101--1133.

Leake, R.C., Brown, M.J., Smith, K., Rollin, K.E., Kimbell, G.S.,
Cameron, D.G., Roberts, P.D., Beddoe-Stephens, B.W., 1985. Volanogenic
and exhalative mineralisation within Devonian rocks of the South Hams
district of Devon. Mineral Reconnaissance Programme Report. British
Geological Survey, No. 79.

Leake, R.C., Cameron, D.G., Bland, D.J., Styles, M.T., Rollin, K.E.,
1992. Exploration for gold in the South Hams district of Devon. Mineral
Reconnaissance Programme Report, Institute of Geological Sciences, No.
121.

Leake, R.C., Norton, G.E., 1993. Mineralisation in the Middle Devonian
volcanic belt and associated rocks of South Devon. Mineral
Reconnaissance Programme Report, Institute of Geological Sciences, No.
129.

Moore, J.M., Jackson, N., 1977. Structure and mineralization in the
Cligga granite stock, Cornwall. Journal of the Geological Society,
London 133, 467--480. <https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.133.5.0467>

Morris, D., 2016. An Integrative Study into the Structural Controls of
Pb-Zn Mineralisation in the North Devon Basin using Tellus South-West
Project Data: Combe Martin, Devon (MSc Dissertation). Camborne School of
Mines, University of Exeter.

Psyrillos, A., Burley, S.D., Manning, D.A.C., Fallick, A.E., 2003.
Coupled mineral-fluid evolution of a basin and high: kaolinization in
the SW England granites in relation to the development of the Plymouth
Basin. Geological Society, London, Special Publications 214, 175--195.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/GSL.SP.2003.214.01.11>

Sawkins, F.J., Burke, K., 1980. Extensional Tectonics and Mid-Paleozoic
Massive Sulfide Occurrence in Europe. Geologische Rundschau 69,
349--360.

Scrivener, R.C., 2006. Cornubian granites and mineralization of SW
England, in: Brenchley, P.J., Rawson, P.F. (Eds.), The Geology of
England and Wales. The Geological Society, London, pp. 257--268.

Scrivener, R.C., Bennett, M.J., 1980. Ore genesis and controls of
mineralisation in the Upper Palaeozoic rocks of north Devon. Proceedings
of the Ussher Society 54--58.

Scrivener, R.C., Cooper, B.V., George, M.C., 1987. Mineralogy and
paragenesis of the Haytor iron ore deposit. Proceedings of the Ussher
Society 6, 558.

Scrivener, R.C., Darbyshire, D.P.F., Shepherd, T.J., 1994. Timing and
significance of crosscourse mineralization in SW England. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 151, 587--590.

Scrivener, R.C., Grant, J.B., Hollick, L.M., Smith, C.W., 2006. Nature
and origin of the Great Perran Iron Lode, Perranporth area, Cornwall.
Geoscience in South-West England 11, 255--256.

Scrivener, R., McVicar Wright, S., 2014. Dartmoor Granite and the
Crediton Graben, in: Shail, R., Andersen, J., Simons, B., Williamson,
B.J. (Eds.), EUROGRANITES 2014: Granites and Mineralisation of Sw
England. Field Excursion Guidebook 12th-18th July 2014, pp. 63--84.

Shail, R.K., Alexander, A.C., 1997. Late Carboniferous to Triassic
reactivation of Variscan basement in the western English Channel:
evidence from onshore exposures in south Cornwall. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 154, 163--168.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.154.1.0163>

Shail, R.K., Stuart, F.M., Wilkinson, J.J., Boyce, A.J., 2003. The role
of post-Variscan extensional tectonics and mantle melting in the
generation of the Lower Permian granites and giant W-As-Sn-Cu-Zn-Pb
orefield of SW England. Applied Earth Science 112, 127--129.

Shail, R., Scrivener, R., Simons, B., Müller, A., Andersen, J.,
Williamson, B.J., Halls, C., Hughes, S., 2014. Early Permian
post-Variscan magmatism, in: Shail, R., Andersen, J., Simons, B.,
Williamson, B.J. (Eds.), EUROGRANITES 2014: Granites and Mineralisation
of Sw England. Field Excursion Guidebook 12th-18th July 2014, pp.
14--36.

Shepherd, T.J., Miller, M.F., Scrivener, R.C., Darbyshire, D.P.F., 1985.
Hydrothermal fluid evolution in relation to mineralization in southwest
England with special reference to the Dartmoor-Bodmin area, in: High
Heat Production (Hhp) Granites, Hydrothermal Circulation and Ore Genesis
Conference, London. Institution of Mining; Metallurgy (Great Britain),
pp. 345--364.

Sheppard, S.M.F., 1977. The Cornubian batholith, SW England: D/H and
18O/16O studies of kaolinite and other alteration minerals. Journal of
the Geological Society, London 133, 573--591.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.133.6.0573>

Stanley, C.J., Criddle, A.J., 1990. Precious and Base Metal Selenide
Mineralization at Hope's Nose, Torquay, Devon. Mineralogical Magazine
54, 485--493.

Tammemagi, H.Y., Smith, N.L., 1975. A radiogeologic study of the
granites of SW. England. Journal of the Geological Society, London 131,
415--427. <https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.131.4.0415>

Tammemagi, H.Y., Wheildon, J., 1974. Terrestrial Heat Flow and Heat
Generation in South-west England. Geophysical Journal of the Royal
Astronomical Society 38, 83--94.

Ussher, W.A.E., Barrow, G., MacAlister, D.A., 1909. The geology of the
country around Bodmin and St. Austell. Memoirs of the Geological Survey,
Explanation of Sheet 347. England; Wales.

Wilkinson, J.J., 1991. Volatile production during contact metamorphism:
the role of organic matter in pelites. Journal of the Geological
Society, London 148, 731--736.

Wilkinson, J.J., 1990. The role of metamorphic fluids in the development
of the Cornubian orefield: fluid inclusion evidence from south Cornwall.
Mineralogical Magazine 54, 219--230.

Wilkinson, J.J., Jenkin, G.R.T., Fallick, A.E., Foster, R.P., 1995.
Oxygen and hydrogen isotopic evolution of Variscan crustal fluids, south
Cornwall, U.K. Chemical Geology 123, 239--254.

Williamson, B.J., Müller, A., Shail, R.K., 2010. Source and partitioning
of B and Sn in the Cornubian batholith of southwest England. Ore Geology
Reviews 38, 1--8. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oregeorev.2010.05.002>

Willis-Richards, J., Jackson, N.J., 1989. Evolution of the Cornubian Ore
Field, Southwest England: Part I. Batholith Modeling and Ore
Distribution. Economic Geology 84, 1078--1100.
