---
title: Cenozoic Reactivation

# View.
#   1 = List
#   2 = Compact
#   3 = Card
#   4 = Citation
view: 3

# Optional header image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
header:
  caption: ""
  image: ""

summary: Cenozoic strike-slip tectonics
weight: 60
---
The Cenozoic era is characterised in SW England by reactivation of
Variscan NW-SE faults in response to Atlantic extension and later
compression from Alpine collision (Holloway and Chadwick, 1986). The
most studied area for these fault movements is along the
Sticklepath-Lustleigh Fault Zone although minor reactivation may have
occurred along other NW-SE faults to the west.

Sinistral reactivation of the Sticklepath-Lustleigh Fault Zone resulted
in up to 6 km of displacement and left-stepping fault systems formed the
Bovey and Decoy basins (Holloway and Chadwick, 1986). The Petrockstow
Basin, however, may have formed from right-stepping dextral reactivation
(still producing net-extension) based on dextral positive flower
structures identified by Bristow et al. (1992). It is more likely that
dextral positive flower structures identified in the Petrockstow Basin
relate to Miocene dextral transpression as observed in the Bovey Basin
(Holloway and Chadwick, 1986). The apparent Palaeogene sinistral
movements and Neogene dextral movements along the Sticklepath-Lustleigh
Fault Zone are corroborated in the St George's Channel by Ruffell and
Carey (2001).

Lundy Island, located in the Bristol Channel has been interpreted to
represent a further pull-apart basin structure (Arthur, 1989), which was
intruded by the Lundy Granite and a basic dyke swarm mapped using
magnetic surveying (Roberts and Smith, 1994). The Lundy Granite is
Palaeocene (59.8 $\pm$ 0.4 to 58.4 $\pm$ 0.4 Ma; Charles et al., 2018)
and forms part of the British Palaeogene Igneous Province. The granite
and slightly later dyke swarm (c. 57.2 $\pm$ 0.5 Ma; Charles et al.,
2018) may record the changing Palaeogene stress regime associated with
the Sticklepath-Lustleigh Fault Zone (Roberts and Smith, 1994).

Whilst major strike-slip basin formation appears to be less prevalent
further west, the Dutson Basin near Launceston, was identified by
Freshney et al. (1982). Furthermore, Oligocene-Miocene sedimentary rocks
have NW-SE palaeocurrent indicators (Walsh et al., 1987) which may
indicate either a geomorphological control or an active fault control
relating to NW-SE faults. Seismicity in the region still occurs and it
is not uncommon for minor seismic events to be recorded in SW England by
the British Geological Survey seismic network. These are illustrated in
Figure 1 and show some
coincidence with major NW-SE faults. A significant cluster also occur to
the south of the Carnmenellis Granite at Constantine (square inset) and
do not correlate with any mapped major regional faults. Many of these faults occur
at shallow crustal depths (\<10 km) which may indicate open fractures, a
key target for in geothermal energy exploration.

<figure>
 <img src="/img/sweg/FigureSeismicEvents2edit.png" alt="SeismicEvents">
 <figcaption>
 <i>Figure 1</i> Distribution of seismic events in SW England overlying digitised faults
from Dearman (1963), Sanderson and Dearman (1973), Walsh et al. (1987),
Jackson et al. (1989), Scrivener (2006). A cluster of seismic events is
outlined which lies south of the Carnmenellis Granite and appears to not
relate to any previously mapped regional structure.	
 </figcaption>
</figure>

### References

Arthur, M.J., 1989. The Cenozoic evolution of the Lundy Pull-Apart Basin
into the Lundy Rhomb Horst. Geological Magazine 126, 187--198.
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0016756800006324>

Bristow, C.M., Palmer, Q.G., Pirrie, D., 1992. Palaeogene basin
development: new evidence from the southern Petrockstow Basin, Devon.
Proceedings of the Ussher Society 8, 19--22.

Charles, J.-H., Whitehouse, M.J., Andersen, J.C.Ã˜., Shail, R.K., Searle,
M.P., 2018. Age and petrogenesis of the Lundy granite: Paleocene
intraplate peraluminous magmatism in the Bristol Channel, UK. Journal of
the Geological Society 175, 44--59.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/jgs2017-023>

Dearman, W.R., 1963. Wrench-faulting in Cornwall and south Devon.
Proceedings of the Geologists' Association 74, 265--287.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-7878(63)80023-1>

Freshney, E.C., Edwards, R.A., Isaac, K.P., Witte, G., Wilkinson, G.C.,
Boulter, M.C., Bain, J.A., 1982. A Tertiary basin at Dutson, near
Launceston, Cornwall, England. Proceedings of the Geologists'
Association 93, 395--402.

Holloway, S., Chadwick, R.A., 1986. The Sticklepath-Lustleigh fault
zone: Tertiary sinistral reactivation of a Variscan dextral strike-slip
fault. Journal of the Geological Society, London 143, 447--452.

Jackson, N.J., Willis-Richards, J., Manning, D.A.C., Sams, M.S., 1989.
Evolution of the Cornubian ore field, Southwest England; Part II,
Mineral deposits and ore-forming processes. Economic Geology 84,
1101--1133.

Roberts, C.L., Smith, S.G., 1994. A new magnetic survey of Lundy Island,
Bristol Channel. Proceedings of the Ussher Society 8, 293--297.

Ruffell, A., Carey, P.F., 2001. The northwestwards continuation of the
Sticklepath Fault: Bristol Channel, SW Wales, St. Georges Channel and
Ireland. Geoscience in South-West England 10, 134--141.

Sanderson, D.J., Dearman, W.R., 1973. Structural zones of the Variscan
fold belt in SW England, their location and development. Journal of the
Geological Society, London 129, 527--536.
<https://doi.org/10.1144/gsjgs.129.5.0527>

Scrivener, R.C., 2006. Cornubian granites and mineralization of SW
England, in: Brenchley, P.J., Rawson, P.F. (Eds.), The Geology of
England and Wales. The Geological Society, London, pp. 257--268.

Walsh, P.T., Atkinson, K., Boulter, M.C., Shakesby, R.A., 1987. The
Oligocene and Miocene outliers of west Cornwall and their bearing on the
geomorphological evolution of Oldland Britain. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Section A: Mathematical &
Physical Sciences 323, 211--245.
<https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.1987.0082>
